A brief history
===============

`GNU Mailman`_ is free software for managing mailing lists.  Almost everybody
who writes or uses free and open source software has probably encountered a
mailing list.  Mailing lists can be discussion-based or announcement-based,
with all kinds of variations in between.  Sometimes mailing lists are
gatewayed to newsgroups on Usenet or similar services such as `Gmane`_.
Mailing lists typically have archives which contain the historical record of
all the messages that have been posted to the mailing list.

GNU Mailman has been around since the early 1990s, when John Viega wrote the
first version to connect fans with the nascent Dave Matthews Band, who he was
friends with in college.  This early version came to our attention by the
mid-90s, when the center of the Python universe had moved from `CWI`_ in the
Netherlands to `CNRI`_ in Reston, Virginia, USA.  At CNRI, we were running
various Python-related mailing lists using Majordomo, a Perl-based mailing
list manager.  Of course, it just wouldn't do for the Python world to be
maintaining so much Perl code.  More importantly, because of its design, we
found that modifying Majordomo for our purposes (such as to add minimal
anti-spam measures) was too difficult.  Ken Manheimer was instrumental in much
of the early GNU Mailman work, and many excellent developers have contributed
to Mailman since then.  Today, Mark Sapiro is maintaining the stable 2.1
branch, while Barry Warsaw concentrates on the new 3.0 version.

Many of the original architectural decisions John made have lived on in the
code right up until the Mailman 3 branch, and can still be seen in the stable
branch.  In the sections that follow, I'll describe some of the more
problematic design decisions in Mailman 1 and 2, and how we've addressed them
in Mailman 3.

In the early Mailman 1 days, we had a lot of problems with messages getting
lost, or bugs causing messages to be re-delivered over and over again.  This
prompted us to articulate two overriding principles that I think were critical
to Mailman's ongoing success:

 * No message should ever be lost
 * No message should ever be delivered more than once

In Mailman 2 we re-designed the message handling system to ensure that these
two principles would always be of prime importance.  This part of the system
has been stable for at least a decade now, and is one of the key reasons that
Mailman is as ubiquitous as it is today.  Despite modernizing this subsystem
in Mailman 3, the design and implementation remains largely unchanged.


The anatomy of a message
========================

One of the core data structures in Mailman is the *email message*, represented
by a *message* object.  Many of the interfaces, functions, and methods in the
system take three arguments: the mailing list object, the message object, and
a metadata dictionary that is used to record and communicate state while a
message is processed through the system.

On the face of it, an email message is a simple object.  It consists of a
number of colon-separated key-value pairs, called the headers, followed by an
empty line which separates the headers from the message body.  This textural
representation should be easy to parse, generate, reason about, and
manipulate, but in fact, it quickly gets quite complicated.  There are
countless RFCs that describe all the variations that can occur, such as
handling complex data types like images, audio, and more.  Email can contain
ASCII English, or just about any language and character set in existence.  The
basic structure of an email message has been borrowed over and over again for
other protocols, such as NNTP and HTTP, yet each is slightly different.  Our
work on Mailman has spawned several libraries just to deal with the vagaries
of this format (often called *RFC822* for the founding `1982 IETF standard`_).
The email libraries originally developed for use by GNU Mailman have found
their way into the Python standard library, where development continues to
make them more standards-compliant and robust.

Email messages can act as containers for other types of data, as defined in
the various MIME standards.  A container *message part* can encode an image,
some audio, or just about any type of binary or text data.  In mail reader
applications, these are known as *attachments*.  Figure 1 shows the structure
of a complex MIME message.  The blue boxes are the container parts, the yellow
boxes are `Base64`_ encoded binary data, and the red box is a plain text
message.

.. figure:: MIME.png

   Figure 1.  A MIME `multipart/mixed` message containing text, images, and an
   audio file.

Container parts can also be arbitrarily nested; these are called *multiparts*
and can in fact get quite deep.  But all email messages regardless of their
complexity can be modeled as a tree, with a single message object at its root.
Within Mailman, we often refer to this as the *message object tree*, and we
pass this tree around by reference to the root message object.  Figure 2 shows
the object tree of the above multipart message.

.. figure:: tree.png

   Figure 2.  Message object tree of a complex MIME email message.

Mailman will almost always modify the original message in some way.
Sometimes, the transformations can be fairly benign, such as adding or
removing headers.  Sometimes, we'll completely change the structure of the
message object tree, such as when the content filter removes certain content
types like HTML, images, or other non-text parts.  Mailman might even collapse
`multipart/alternatives`, where a message appears as both plain text and as
some rich text type, or add additional parts containing information about the
mailing list itself.

Mailman generally parses the *on the wire* bytes representation of a message
just once, when it first comes into the system.  From then on, it deals only
with the message object tree until it's ready to send it back out to the
outgoing mail server.  It's at that point that Mailman flattens the tree back
into a bytes representation.  Along the way, Mailman `pickles`_ the message
object tree for quick storage to, and reconstruction from, the file system.
*Pickles* are a Python technology for serializing any Python object to a byte
stream, including all its subobjects, and it's perfectly suited to optimizing
the handling of email message object trees. *Unpickling* is deserializing this
byte stream back into a live object.  By storing these byte streams in a file,
Python programs gain low-cost persistence.


The mailing list
================

The *mailing list* is obviously another core object in the Mailman system, and
most of the operations in Mailman are mailing list-centric, such as:

 * Membership is defined in terms of a user or address being subscribed to a
   specific mailing list.
 * Mailing lists have a large number of configuration options that are stored
   in the database, and which control everything from posting privileges, to
   how the message is modified before final delivery.
 * Mailing lists have owners and moderators which have greater permission to
   change aspects of the list, or to approve and reject questionable
   postings.
 * Every mailing list has its own archive.
 * Users post new messages to a specific mailing list.

and so on.  Almost every operation in Mailman takes a mailing list as an
argument - it's that fundamental.  Mailing list objects have undergone a
radical redesign in Mailman 3 to make them more efficient and to expand their
flexibility.

One of John's earliest design decisions was how to represent a mailing list
object inside the system.  For this central data type, he chose a Python class
with multiple base classes, each of which implements a small part of the
mailing list's responsibility.  These cooperating base classes, called *mixin
classes* were a clever way to organize the code so that it was easy to add
entirely new functionality.  By grafting on a new mixin base class, the core
``MailList`` class could easily accommodate something new and cool.

For example, to add an auto-responder to Mailman 2, a mixin class was created
that held the data specific to that feature, which would get automatically
initialized when a new mailing list was created.  The mixin class also
provided the methods necessary to support the auto-responder feature.

This structure was even more useful when it came to the design of the mailing
``MailList`` object's persistence.  Another of John's early design decisions
was to use Python pickles for storing``MailList`` state persistence.

In Mailman 2, the ``MailList`` object's state is stored in a file called
``config.pck``, which is just the pickled representation of the ``MailList``
object's dictionary.  Every Python object has an attribute dictionary called
``__dict__``.  So saving a mailing list object then is simply a matter of
pickling its ``__dict__`` to a file, and loading it just involves reading the
pickle from the file and reconstituting its ``__dict__``.

Thus, when a new mixin class was added to implement some new functionality,
all the attributes of the mixin were automatically pickled and unpickled
appropriately.  The only extra work we had to do was to maintain a *schema
version number* to automatically upgrade older mailing list objects when new
attributes were added via the mixin, since the pickled representation of older
``MailList`` objects would be missing the new attributes.

As convenient as this was, both the mixin architecture and pickle persistence
eventually crumbled under their own weight.  Site administrators often
requested ways to access the mailing list configuration variables via
external, non-Python systems.  But the pickle protocol is entirely
Python-specific, so sequestering all that useful data inside a pickle wouldn't
work for them.  Also, because the entire state of a mailing list was contained
in the ``config.pck``, and Mailman has multiple processes that need to read,
modify, and write the mailing list state, we had to implement exclusive
file-based and NFS-safe locks to ensure data consistency.  Every time some
part of Mailman wants to change the state of a mailing list, it must acquire
the lock, write out the change, then release the lock.  Even read operations
can require a re-load of the list's ``config.pck`` file, since some other
process may have changed it before the read operation.  This serialization of
operations on a mailing list turned out to be horribly slow and inefficient.

For these reasons, Mailman 3 stores all of its data in a SQL database.  By
default SQLite3 is used, though this is easily changed, since Mailman 3
utilizes the Object Relational Mapper called Storm, which supports a wide
variety of databases.  PostgreSQL support was added with just a few lines of
code, and a site administrator can enable it by changing one configuration
variable.

Another, bigger problem is that in Mailman 2, each mailing list is a silo.
Often operations span across many mailing lists, or even all of them.  For
example, a user might want to temporarily suspend all their subscriptions when
they go on vacation.  Or a site administrator might want to add some
disclaimer to the welcome message of all of the mailing lists on her system.
Even the simple matter of figuring out which mailing lists a single address
was subscribed to required unpickling the state of every mailing list on the
system, since membership information was kept in the ``config.pck`` file too.

Another problem was that each ``config.pck`` file lived in a directory named
after the mailing list, but Mailman was originally designed without
consideration for virtual domains.  This lead to a very unfortunate problem
where two mailing lists could not have the same name in different domains.
For example, if you owned both the ``example.com`` and ``example.org``
domains, and you wanted them to act independently and allow for a different
``support`` mailing list in each, you cannot do this in Mailman 2, without
modifications to the code, a barely-supported hook, or conventional
workarounds that forced a different list name under the covers, which is the
approach used by large sites such as SourceForge.

This has been solved in Mailman 3 by changing the way mailing lists are
identified, along with moving all the data into a traditional database.  The
*primary key* for the mailing list table is the *fully qualified list name* or
as you'd probably recognize it, the posting address.  Thus
``support@example.com`` and ``support@example.org`` are now completely
independent rows in the mailing list table, and can easily co-exist in a
single Mailman system.


Runners
=======

Messages flow through the system by way of a set of independent processes
called *runners*.  Originally conceived as a way of predictably processing all
the queued message files found in a particular directory, there are now a few
runners which are simply independent, long-running processes that perform a
specific task and are managed by a master process.  More on that later.  When
a runner does manage files in a directory, it is called a *queue runner*.

Mailman is religiously single threaded, even though there is significant
parallelism to exploit.  For example, Mailman can accept messages from the
mail server at the same time it's sending messages out to recipients, or
processing bounces, or archiving a message.  Parallelism in Mailman is
achieved through the use of multiple processes, in the form of these runners.
For example, there is an *incoming* queue runner with the sole job of
accepting (or rejecting) messages from the upstream mail server.  There is an
*outgoing* queue runner with the sole job of communicating with the upstream
mail server over SMTP in order to send messages out to the final recipients.
There's an *archiver* queue runner, a *bounce* processing queue runner, a
queue runner for forwarding messages to an NNTP server, a runner for composing
digests, and several others.  Runners which don't manage a queue include a
`Local Mail Transfer Protocol`_ (LMTP) server and an administrative HTTP
server.

Each queue runner is responsible for a single directory, i.e., its *queue*.
While the typical Mailman system can perform perfectly well with a single
process per queue, we use a clever algorithm for allowing parallelism within a
single queue directory, without requiring any kind of cooperation or locking.
The secret is in the way we name the files within the queue directory.

As mentioned above, every message that flows through the system is also
accompanied by a metadata dictionary that accumulates state and allows
independent components of Mailman to communicate with each other.  Python's
``pickle`` library is able to serialize and deserialize multiple objects to a
single file, so we can pickle both the message object tree and metadata
dictionary into one file.

There is a core Mailman class called ``Switchboard`` which provides an
interface for enqueuing (i.e., writing) and dequeuing (i.e., reading) the
message object tree and metadata dictionary to files in a specific queue
directory.  Every queue directory has at least one switchboard instance, and
every queue runner instance has exactly one switchboard.

Pickle files all end in the ``.pck`` suffix, though you may also see ``.bak``,
``.tmp``, and ``.psv`` files in a queue.  These are used to ensure the two
sacrosanct tenets of Mailman: no file should ever get lost, and no message
should ever be delivered more than once.  But things usually work properly and
these files can be pretty rare.

As indicated, for really busy sites, Mailman supports running more than one
runner process per queue directory, completely in parallel, with no
communication between them or locking necessary to process the files.  It does
this by naming the pickle files with a SHA1 hash, and then allowing a single
queue runner to manage just a slice of the hash space.  So if a site wants to
run two runners on the *bounces* queue, one would process files from the top
half of the hash space, and the other would process files from the bottom half
of the hash space.  The hashes are calculated using the contents of the
pickled message object tree, the name of the mailing list that the message is
destined for, and a time stamp.  The SHA1 hashes are effectively random, and
thus on average a two-runner queue directory will have about equal amounts of
work per process.  And because the hash space can be statically divided, these
processes can operate on the same queue directory with no interference or
communication necessary.

There's an interesting limitation to this algorithm.  Since the splitting
algorithm allots one or more bits of the hash to each space, the number of
runners per queue directory must be a power of 2.  This means there can be 1,
2, 4, or 8 runner processes per queue, but not, for example, 5.  In practice
this has never been a problem, since few sites will ever need more than 4
processes to handle their load.

There's another side effect of this algorithm that did cause problems during
the early design of this system.  Despite the unpredictability of email
delivery in general, the best user experience is provided by processing the
queue files in FIFO order, so that replies to a mailing list get sent out in
roughly chronological order.  Not making a best effort attempt at doing so can
cause confusion for members.  But using SHA1 hashes as file names obliterates
any timestamps, and for performance reasons ``stat()`` calls on queue files, or
unpickling the contents (e.g., to read a time stamp in the metadata) should be
avoided.

Mailman's solution was to extend the file naming algorithm to include a time
stamp prefix, as the number of seconds since the epoch (e.g.,
``<timestamp>+<sha1hash>.pck``).  Each loop through the queue runner starts by
doing an ``os.listdir()``, which returns all the files in the queue directory,
then for each file, it splits the file name and ignores any file names where
the SHA1 hash doesn't match its slice of responsibility.  The runner then
sorts the remaining files based on the timestamp part of the file name.  It's
true that with multiple queue runners each managing different slices of the
hash space, this could lead to ordering problems between the parallel runners,
but in practice, the timestamp ordering is enough to preserve end-user
perception of best-effort sequential delivery.

In practice this has worked extremely well for at least a decade, with only
the occasional minor bug fix or elaboration to handle obscure corner cases and
failure modes.  It's one of the most stable parts of Mailman and was largely
ported untouched from Mailman 2 to Mailman 3.


The master runner
=================

With all these runner processes, Mailman needed a simple way to start and stop
them consistently.  Thus the master watcher process was born, and it must be
able to handle both queue runners, and runners which do not manage a queue.
For example, in Mailman 3, we accept messages from the incoming upstream mail
server via LMTP, which is a protocol similar to SMTP, but which operates only
for local delivery and thus can be much simpler, as it doesn't need to deal
with the vagaries of delivering mail over an unpredictable Internet.  The LMTP
runner simply listens on a port, waiting for its upstream mail server to
connect and send it a byte stream.  It then parses this byte stream into a
message object tree, creates an initial metadata dictionary, and enqueues this
into a processing queue directory.

Mailman also has a runner that listens on another port and processes REST
requests over HTTP.  This process doesn't handle queue files at all.

A typical running Mailman system might have 8 or 10 processes, and they all
need to be stopped and started appropriately and conveniently.  They can also
crash occasionally, for example when a bug in Mailman causes an unexpected
exception to occur.  When this happens, the message being delivered is
*shunted* to a holding area, with the state of the system at the time of the
exception preserved in the message metadata.  This ensures that an uncaught
exception does not cause multiple deliveries of the message.  In theory, the
Mailman site administrator could fix the problem, and then *unshunt* the
offending messages for redelivery, picking up where it left off.  After
shunting the problematic message, the master restarts the crashed queue
runner, which begins processing the remaining messages in its queue.

When the master watcher starts, it looks in a configuration file to determine
how many and which types of child runners to start.  For the LMTP and REST
runners, there is usually a single process.  For the queue runners, as
mentioned above, there can be a power-of-2 number of parallel processes.  The
master ``fork()``s and ``exec()``s all the runner processes based on the
configuration file, passing in the appropriate command line arguments to each
(e.g., to tell the subprocess which slice of the hash space to look at).  Then
the master basically sits in an infinite loop, blocking until one of its child
processes exits.  It keeps track of the process ID for each child, along with
a count of the number of times the child has been restarted.  This count
prevents a catastrophic bug from causing a cascade of unstoppable restarts.
There's a configuration variable which specifies how many restarts are
allowed, after which an error is logged and the runner is not restarted.

When a child does exit, the master looks at both the exit code and the signal
that killed the subprocess.  Each runner process installs a number of signal
handlers with the following semantics:

 * ``SIGTERM`` - intentionally stop the subprocess.  It is not restarted.
   ``SIGTERM`` is what ``init`` will kill the process with when changing run
   levels, and it's also the signal that Mailman itself uses to stop the
   subprocess.
 * ``SIGINT`` - also used to intentionally stop the subprocess, it's the
   signal that occurs when control-C is used in a shell.  The runner is not
   restarted.
 * ``SIGHUP`` - tells the process to close and reopen its log files, but to
   keep running.  This is used when rotating log files.
 * ``SIGUSR1`` - initially stop the subprocess, but allow the master to
   restart the process.  This is used in the ``restart`` command of init
   scripts.

The master also responds to all four of these signals, but it doesn't do much
more than forward them to all its subprocesses.  So if you sent ``SIGTERM`` to
the master, all the subprocesses would get ``SIGTERM``'d and exit.  The master
would know that the subprocess exited because of ``SIGTERM`` and it would know
that this was an intentional stoppage, so it would not restart the runner.

To ensure that only one master is running at any time, it acquires a lock with
a lifetime of about a day and a half.  The master installs a ``SIGALRM``
handler, which wakes the master up once per day so that it can refresh the
lock.  Because the lock's lifetime is longer than the wake up interval, the
lock should never time out or be broken while Mailman is running, unless of
course the system crashes or the master is killed with an uncatchable signal.
In those cases, the command line interface to the master process provides an
option to override a stale lock.

This leads to the last bit of the master watcher story, the command line
interface to it.  The actual master script takes very few command line
options.  Both it and the queue runner scripts are intentionally kept simple.
This wasn't the case in Mailman 2, where the master script was fairly complex
and tried to do too much, which made it more difficult to understand and
debug.  In Mailman 3, the real command line interface for the master process
is in the ``bin/mailman`` script, a kind of meta-script that contains a number
of subcommands, in a style made popular by programs like Subversion.  This
reduces the number of programs that need to be installed on your shell's
``PATH``.  ``bin/mailman`` has subcommands to start, stop, and restart the
master, as well as all the subprocesses, and also to cause all the log files
to be reopened.  The ``start`` subcommand ``fork()``s and ``exec()``s the
master process, while the others simply send the appropriate signal to the
master, which then propagates it to its subprocesses as described above.

This improved separation of responsibility make it much easier to understand
each individual piece.


Rules, links, and chains
========================

A mailing list posting goes through several phases from the time it's first
received, until the time it's sent out to the list's membership.  In Mailman
2, each processing step was represented by a *handler*, and a string of
handlers were put together into a *pipeline*.  So, when a message came into
the system, Mailman would first determine which pipeline would be used to
process it, and then each handler in the pipeline would be called in turn.
Some handlers would do moderation functions (e.g., "is this person allowed to
post to the mailing list?"), others would do modification functions (e.g.,
"which headers should I remove or add?"), and others would copy the message to
other queues.  A few examples of the latter are:

 * A message accepted for posting would be copied to the *archiver* queue at
   some point, so that its queue runner would add the message to the archive.
 * A copy of the message eventually had to end up in the *outgoing* queue so
   that it could be delivered to the upstream mail server, which has the
   ultimate responsibility of delivery to a list member.
 * A copy of the message had to get put into a digest for people who wanted
   only occasional, regular traffic from the list, rather than an individual
   message whenever someone sent it.

The pipeline-of-handlers architecture proved to be quite powerful.  It
provided an easy way that people could extend and modify Mailman to do custom
operations.  The interface for a handler was fairly straightforward, and it
was a simple matter to implement a new handler, ensuring it got added to the
right pipeline in the right location to accomplish the custom operation.

One problem with this though was that mixing moderation and modification in
the same pipeline became problematic.  The handlers had to be sequenced in the
pipeline just so, or unpredictable or undesirable things would happen.  For
example, if the handler that added the `RFC 2369`_ ``List-*`` headers came
after the handler to copy the message to the digest collator, then folks
receiving digests would get incorrect copies of the list posts.  In different
cases, it might be beneficial to moderate the message before or after
modifying it.  In Mailman 3, the moderation and modification operations have
been split into separate subsystems for better control over the sequencing.

As described previously, the LMTP runner parses an incoming byte stream into a
message object tree and creates an initial metadata dictionary for the
message.  It then enqueues these to one or another queue directory.  Some
messages may be *email commands* (e.g., to join or leave a mailing list, to
get automated help, etc.) which are handled by a separate queue.  Most
messages are postings to the mailing list, and these get put in the *incoming*
queue.  The incoming queue runner processes each message sequentially through
a *chain* consisting of any number of *links*.  There is a built-in chain that
most mailing lists use, but even this is configurable.

Figure 3 illustrates the default set of chains in the Mailman 3 system.  Each
link in the chain is illustrated by a rounded rectangle.  The built-in chain
is where the initial rules of moderation are applied to the incoming message,
and in this chain, each link is associated with a *rule*.  Rules are simply
pieces of code that get passed the three typical parameters: the mailing list,
the message object tree, and the metadata dictionary.  Rules are not supposed
to modify the message; they just make a binary decision and return a boolean
answering the question "did the rule match or not?".  Rules can also record
information in the metadata dictionary.

In the figure, green arrows indicates message flow when the rule matches,
while red arrows indicate message flow when the rule does not match.  The
outcome of each rule is recorded in the metadata dictionary so that later on,
Mailman will know (and be able to report) exactly which rules matched and
which ones missed.  The blue arrows indication transitions which are taken
unconditionally, regardless of whether the rule matches or not.

.. figure:: chains.png

   Figure 3.  Simplified view of default chains with their links.

It's important to note that the rules themselves do not dispatch based on
outcome.  In the built-in chain, each link is associated with an *action*
which is performed when the rule matches.  So for example, when the "loop"
rule matches (meaning, the mailing list has seen this message before), the
message is immediate handed off to the "discard" chain, which throws the
message away after some bookkeeping.  If the "loop" rule does not match, the
next link in the chain will process the message.

In the figure, the links associated with "administrivia", "max-size", and
"truth" rules have no binary decision.  In case of the first two, this is
because their action is *deferred*, so they simply record the match outcome
and processing continues to the next link.  The "any" rule then matches if any
previous rule matches.  This way, Mailman can report on all the reasons why a
message is not allowed to be posted, instead of just the first reason.  There
are several more such rules not illustrated here for simplicity.

The "truth" rule is a bit different.  It's always associated with the last
link in the chain, and it always matches.  With the combination of the
penultimate "any" rule sweeping aside all previously matching messages, the
last link then knows that any message making it through thus far is allowed to
be posted to the mailing list, so it unconditionally moves the message to the
"accept" chain.

There are a few other details of chain processing not described here, but the
architecture is very flexible and extensible so that just about any type of
message processing can be implemented, and sites can customize and extend
rules, links, and chains.

What happens to the message when it hits the "accept" chain?  The message,
which is now deemed appropriate for the mailing list, is sent off to the
*pipeline* queue for some modifications before it is delivered to the end
recipients.  This process is described in more detail in the following
section.

The "hold" chain puts the message into a special bucket for the human
moderator to review.  The "moderation" chain does a little additional
processing to decide whether the message should be accepted, held for
moderator approval, discarded, or rejected.  In order to reduce clutter in the
diagram, the "reject" chain, which is used to bounce messages back to the
original sender, is not illustrated.


Handlers and pipelines
======================

Once a message as made its way through the chains and rules, and a message is
accepted for posting, the message must be further processed before it can be
delivered to the final recipients.  For example, some headers may get added or
deleted, and some messages may get some extra decorations that provide
important disclaimers or information, such as how to leave the mailing list.
These modifications are performed by a *pipeline* which contains a sequence of
*handlers*.  In a manner similar to chains and rules, pipelines and handlers
are extensible, but there are a number of built-in pipelines for the common
cases.  Handlers have a similar interface as rules, accepting a mailing list,
message object, and metadata dictionary.  However unlike rules, handlers can
and do modify the message.

Figure 4 illustrates the default pipeline and set of handlers (some handlers
are omitted for simplicity).

.. figure:: pipeline.png

   Figure 4.  Pipeline queue handlers.

For example, a posted message needs to have a ``Precedence:`` header added
which tells other automated software that this message came from a mailing
list.  This header is a de facto standard to prevent vacation programs from
responding back to the mailing list.  Adding this header (among other header
modifications) is done by the "add headers" handler.  Unlike rules, handler
order generally doesn't matter, and messages always flow through all handlers
in the pipeline.

Some handlers send copies of the message to other queues.  As shown in the
figure, there is a handler that makes a copy of the message for folks who want
to receive digests.  Copies are also sent to the archive queue for eventual
delivery to the mailing list archives.  Finally, the message is copied to the
outgoing queue for final delivery to the mailing list's members.


VERP
====

*VERP* stands for *Variable Envelope Return Path*, and it is a `well-known
technique`_ that mailing lists can use to unambiguously determine bouncing
recipient addresses.  When an address on a mailing list is no longer active,
the recipient's mail server will send a notification back to the sender.  In
the case of a mailing list, you want this bounce to go back to the mailing
list, not to the original author of the message.  The author can't do anything
about the bounce, and worse, sending the bounce back to the author can leak
information about who is subscribed to the mailing list.  When the mailing
list gets the bounce, it can do something useful, such as disable the bouncing
address or remove it from the list's membership.

There are two general problems with this.  First, even though there is a
standard format for `these bounces`_ (called *delivery status notifications*)
many deployed mail servers do not conform to it.  Instead, the body of their
bounce messages can contain just about any amount of
difficult-to-machine-parse gobbledygook, which makes automated parsing
difficult.  In fact, Mailman uses a library that contains dozens of bounce
format heuristics, all of which have been seen in the wild during the 15 years
of Mailman's existence.

Second, imagine the situation where a member of a mailing list has several
forwards.  She might be subscribed to the list with her anne@example.com
address, but this might forward to person@example.org, which might further
forward the message to me@example.net.  When the final destination server at
example.net receives the message, it will usually just send a bounce saying
that me@example.net is no longer valid.  But the Mailman server that sent the
message only knows the member as anne@example.com, so a bounce flagging
me@example.net will not contain a subscribed address, and Mailman will ignore
it.

Along comes VERP, which exploits a requirement of the fundamental `SMTP
protocol`_ to provide unambiguous bounce detection, by returning such bounce
messages to the *envelope sender*.  This is not the ``From:`` field in the
message body, but in fact the ``MAIL FROM`` value set during the SMTP dialog.
This is preserved along the delivery route, and the ultimate receiving mail
server is required by the standards to send the bounces to this address.
Mailman uses this fact to encode the original recipient email address into the
``MAIL FROM`` value.

If the recipient is anne@example.com and the Mailman server is
mylist@example.org, then the VERP-encoded envelope sender for a mailing list
posting sent to anne@example.com will be
``mylist-bounce+anne=example.com@example.org``.  Here, the ``+`` is a local
address separator, which is a format supported by most modern mail servers.
So when the bounce comes back, it will actually be delivered to
``mylist-bounce@example.com`` but with the ``To:`` header still set to
VERP-encoded recipient address.  Mailman can then parse this ``To:`` header to
decode the original recipient as anne@example.com.

While VERP is an extremely powerful tool for culling bad addresses from the
mailing list, it does have one potentially important disadvantage.  Using VERP
requires that Mailman send out exactly one copy of the message per recipient.
Without VERP, Mailman can bundle up identical copies of an outgoing message
for multiple recipients, thus reducing overall bandwidth and processing time.
But VERP requires a unique ``MAIL FROM`` for each recipient, and the only way
to do that is to send a unique copy of the message.  Generally this is an
acceptable trade-off, and in fact, once these individualized messages are
being sent for VERP anyway, there are a lot of useful things Mailman can also
do.  For example, it can embed a URL in the footer of the message customized
for each recipient which gives them a direct link to unsubscribe from the
list.  You could even imagine various types of *mail-merge* operations for
customizing the body of the message for each individual recipient.


REST
====

One of the key architectural changes in Mailman 3 addresses a common request
over the years: allow Mailman to be more easily integrated with external
systems.  When I was hired by Canonical in 2007, my job was originally to add
mailing lists to Launchpad.  I knew that Mailman 2 could do the job, but there
was a requirement to use Launchpad's web user interface instead of Mailman's
default user interface.  Since Launchpad mailing lists were almost always
going to be discussion lists, we wanted very little variability in the way
they operated.  List administrators would not need the plethora of options
available in the typical Mailman site, and what few options they would need
would be exposed through the Launchpad web user interface.

At the time, Launchpad was not open source (this changed in 2009), so we had
to design the integration in such a way that Mailman 2's GPLv2 code could not
infect Launchpad.  This led to a number of architectural decision during that
integration design that were quite tricky and somewhat inefficient.  Because
Launchpad is now open source, these hacks wouldn't be necessary today, but
having to do it this way did provide some very valuable lessons on how a web
user interface-less Mailman could be integrated with external systems.  The
vision that emerged was of a core engine that implemented mailing list
operations efficiently and reliably, and that could be managed by any kind of
web front-end, including ones written in Zope, Django, or PHP, or with no web
user interface at all.

There were a number of technologies at the time that would allow this, and in
fact Mailman's integration with Launchpad is based on XMLRPC.  But XMLRPC has
a number of problems that make it a less-than-ideal protocol.

Mailman 3 has adopted the `Representation State Transfer`_ (REST) model for
external administrative control.  REST is based on HTTP, and Mailman's default
object representation is `JSON`_.  These protocols are ubiquitous and
well-supported in a large variety of programming languages and environments,
making it fairly easy to integrate Mailman with third party systems.  REST was
the perfect fit for Mailman 3, and now much of its functionality is exposed
through a REST API.

This is a powerful paradigm that more applications should adopt: deliver a
core engine that implements its basic functionality well, exposing a REST API
to query and control it.  The REST API provides yet another way of integrating
with Mailman, the others being utilizing the command line interface, and
writing Python code to access the internal API.  This architecture is
extremely flexible and can be used and integrated in ways that are beyond the
initial vision of the system designers.

Not only does this design allow for much greater choices for deployment, but
it even allowed the official components of the system to be designed and
implemented independently.  For example, the new official web user interface
for Mailman 3 is technically a separate project with its own code base, driven
primarily by experienced web designers.  These outstanding developers are
empowered to make decisions, create designs, and execute implementations
without the core engine development being a bottleneck.  The web user
interface work feeds back into the core engine implementation by requesting
additional functionality, exposed through the REST API, but they needn't wait
for it, since they can mock up the server side on their end and continue
experimenting and developing the web user interface while the core engine
catches up.

We plan to use the REST API for many more things, including allowing the
scripting of common operations, and even integration with IMAP or NNTP servers
for alternative access to the archives.


Internationalization
====================

GNU Mailman was one of the first Python programs to embrace
internationalization.  Of course, because Mailman does not usually modify the
contents of email messages posted through it, those messages can be in any
language of the original author's choosing.  However, when interacting
directly with Mailman, either through the web interface, or via email
commands, users would prefer to use their own natural language.

Mailman pioneered many of the technologies used in the Python world to
internationalize applications, but it is actually much more complex than most
applications.  In a typical desktop environment, the natural language is
chosen when the user logs in, and remains static throughout the desktop
session.  However, Mailman is a server application, so it must be able to
handle dozens of languages, separate from the language of the system on which
it runs.  In fact, Mailman must somehow determine the *language context* that
a response is to be returned under, and translate its text to that language.
Sometimes a response may even involve multiple language, for example if a
bounce message from a Japanese user is to be forwarded to list administrators
who speak German, Italian, and Catalan.

Again, Mailman pioneered some key Python technologies to handle complex
language contexts such as these.  It utilizes a library that manages a stack
of languages, which can be pushed onto and popped from as the context changes,
even within the processing of a single message.  It also implements an
elaborate scheme for customizing its response templates based on site
preferences, list owner preferences, and language choice.  For example, if a
list owner wants to customize a response template for one of her lists, but
only for Japanese users, they would place the specific template in the
appropriate place on the file system, and this would override more generic
defaults.


Lessons
=======

While this article has provided an overview of Mailman 3's architecture, and
insight into how that architecture has evolved over the 15 years of its
existence (through three major rewrites), there are lots of other interesting
architectural decisions in Mailman which I can't cover.  These include the
configuration subsystem, the testing infrastructure, the database layer, the
programmatic use of formal interfaces, archiving, mailing list styles, the
email commands and command-line interface, and integration with the outgoing
mail server.  Contact us on the `mailman-developers`_ mailing list if you're
interested in more detail.

Here are some lessons we've learned while rewriting a popular, established,
and stable piece of the open source ecosystem.

* Use test driven development (TDD).  There really is no other way!  Mailman 2
  largely lacks an automated test suite, and while it's true that not all of
  the Mailman 3 code base is covered by its test suite, most of it is, and all
  new code is required to be accompanied by tests, using either ``unittests``
  or ``doctests``.  Doing TDD is the only way to gain the confidence that the
  changes you make today do not introduce regressions in existing code.  Yes,
  TDD can sometimes take longer, but think of it as an investment in the
  future quality of your code.  In that way, *not* having a good test suite
  means you're just wasting your time.  Remember the mantra: untested code is
  broken code.

* Get your bytes/strings story straight from the beginning.  In Python 3, a
  sharp distinction is made between Unicode text strings and byte arrays,
  which, while initially painful, is a huge benefit to writing correct code.
  Python 2 blurred this line by having both Unicode and 8-bit ASCII strings,
  with some automated coercions between them.  While appearing to be a useful
  convenience, problems with this fuzzy line is the number one cause of bugs
  in Mailman 2.  This is not helped by the fact that email is notoriously
  difficult to classify between strings and bytes.  Technically, the
  on-the-wire representation of an email is as a sequence of bytes, but these
  bytes are almost always ASCII, and there is a strong temptation to
  manipulate message components as text.  The email standards themselves
  describe how human readable, non-ASCII text can be safely encoded, so even
  things like finding a ``Re:`` prefix in a ``Subject:`` header will be text
  operations, not byte operations.  Mailman's principle is to convert all text
  to Unicode as early as possible, deal with the text as Unicode internally,
  and only convert it back to bytes on the way out.  It's critical to be
  crystal clear from the start when you're dealing with bytes and when you're
  dealing with text (``unicode``), since it's very difficult to retrofit this
  fundamental model shift later.

* Internationalize your application from the start.  Do you want your
  application to only be used by the minority of the world that speaks
  English?  Think about how many fantastic users this ignores!  It's not hard
  to set up internationalization, and there are lots of good tools for making
  this easy, many of which were pioneered in Mailman.  Don't worry about the
  translations to start with, if your application is accessible to the world's
  wealth of languages, you will have volunteer translators knocking down your
  door to help.

GNU Mailman is a vibrant project with a healthy user base, and lots
of opportunities for contributions.  Here are some resources you can use if
you think you'd like to help us out, which I hope you do!

A final note; while this article was being written, we learned with sadness of
the passing of `Tokio Kikuchi`_, a Japanese professor who contributed heavily
to Mailman, and was especially knowledgeable about internationalization and
the idiosyncrasies of Japanese mail user agents.  He will be greatly missed.

Primary web site        : http://www.list.org
Project wiki            : http://wiki.list.org
Developer mailing list  : mailman-developers@python.org
Users mailing list      : mailman-users@python.org
Freenode IRC channel    : #mailman


.. _`GNU Mailman`: http://www.list.org
.. _`Gmane`: http://gmane.org/
.. _`CWI`: http://www.cwi.nl/
.. _`CNRI`: http://www.cnri.reston.va.us/
.. _`1982 IETF standard`: http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc822.html
.. _`pickles`: http://docs.python.org/library/pickle.html
.. _`well-known technique`: http://cr.yp.to/proto/verp.txt
.. _`these bounces`: http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc5337.html
.. _`SMTP protocol`: http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc5321.html
.. _`Representational State Transfer`:
   http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Representational_state_transfer
.. _`JSON`: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Json
.. _`Tokio Kikuchi`: http://wiki.list.org/display/COM/TokioKikuchi
.. _`Base64`: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Base64
.. _`Local Mail Transfer Protocol`: http://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc2033
.. _`RFC 2396`: http://www.faqs.org/rfcs/rfc2369.html
.. _`mailman-developers`: http://mail.python.org/mailman/listinfo/mailman-developers
